PART THE FIRST
The Great War

The relative stability of the monetary order from the year 1873 coincided, as if by divine providence, with the stability of the political order; and as the world traded in one money, so too did it approach an ideal—nay, a glorious vision—of one vast economic unit, with declining restrictions upon trade and blessed reductions in military conflicts. Relations between the great powers continued to improve over time; and the dreadful prospect of war seemed less and less likely, fading like some dark specter before the bright dawn of civilization. Britain and France, those ancient and bitter rivals who had, for centuries uncounted, spilled each other's blood upon a hundred battlefields, signed the Entente Cordiale in the year 1904—an agreement delineating British and French colonies in the mysterious lands of North Africa, preventing conflict between the two nations, and leading to growing cooperation between these mighty empires. Anglo-Russian relationships had also improved, thank Heaven, with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Convention in 1907, in which Britain and Russia delineated their Asian colonies to avoid the horrible calamity of war.

Britain's relationship with Germany was also improving in a manner most auspicious. Through the royal marriages of her children to European monarchs, Britain's great Queen Victoria stood as grandmother to many royals across the vast continent, most notably the German Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose coronation in 1888 marked a glorious moment for British-German relations; for he was the eldest of the forty-two grandchildren of Queen Victoria through her eldest daughter, the Princess Victoria. At his birth, Wilhelm II stood third in line for succession to the Prussian throne and sixth in line for succession to the British throne—a position, no doubt, which should have bound the two nations in bonds of steel. When Queen Victoria lay upon her death bed in the year 1901, Wilhelm II, who loved her dearly and devotedly, traveled to be by her side through that dark and dolorous hour. It is said—and I have no doubt of its truth—that she passed away in his very arms; and he carried her coffin at her funeral, a sight most affecting to all who witnessed it.

After its great victory in the Franco-Prussian war, Germany focused its energies upon consolidating its empire in the European mainland; and Britain and Germany approached the twentieth century with their interests harmonized and the dreadful threat of war subsiding like storm clouds before a gentle wind. Germany could dominate the European mainland, whilst Britain expanded its glorious empire everywhere else across the globe. An alliance between the two great powers was even seriously considered—an arrangement which seemed as natural as breathing—with Germany eventually rejecting it, for they worried that Britain's imperial entanglements could drag them to an unwanted war with Britain's historic rivals, Russia and France; or, more dreadful still, the unthinkable horror of conflict with both nations at once.

From the year 1890 to the year 1902, three potential problems emerged, like serpents from the grass, in British-German relations. Kaiser Wilhelm II removed the great Bismarck as chancellor and ignored his sage advice to avoid pursuing a foreign empire—a folly which inevitably aroused the distrust and discontent of the British, who possessed the world's most magnificent empire and did not wish Germany competing with them for territories across the vast seas. Wilhelm II also became obsessed—nay, consumed—with building a navy to support his imperial ambitions, provoking more animosity from Britain, who commanded the world's largest and most powerful navy, which controlled the entrance to the North Sea, Germany's naval gateway to the world beyond.

The death of Queen Victoria in 1901 and the ascension of her son, Edward VII, to the throne added to the growing friction in British-German relations. Kaiser Wilhelm harbored a jealous rivalry with his uncle Edward, who had always looked down upon him as a young man and his nephew, rather than treating him as an equal ruling monarch of a superpower—a slight which Wilhelm, with his wild and erratic temperament, could not easily forgive. Known as "the possessor of the least inhibited tongue in Europe," Wilhelm had suffered brain damage during his birth which caused him to be erratic, impulsive, and emotional in all his dealings; and his behavior created needless tension between Germany and Britain that threatened to sour the increasingly cordial and cooperative international order. In an infamous interview with The Daily Telegraph in October of 1908, Kaiser Wilhelm's attempts at winning over British public opinion backfired most spectacularly, as his outbursts caused increased tension not merely with Britain, but also with France, Russia, and far-off Japan. Wilhelm's naval and imperial ambitions alarmed the British exceedingly; and he grew increasingly concerned—one might say paranoid—that Britain's rapprochement with France and Russia was meant to encircle and suffocate Germany, like some great serpent constricting its prey.

But these dark fears were alleviated, as if by magic, in the second decade of the twentieth century. After King Edward VII died, Kaiser Wilhelm II attended his funeral on the twentieth day of May, 1910—an occasion which helped mend relations with the British people and royalty in a manner most gratifying. A popular king at the very zenith of his glorious empire, his funeral procession drew an estimated three to five million people, with thirty-five thousand soldiers lining the funeral's route in a display of military splendor never before witnessed. From across Europe and the world, monarchs packed the ancient palace in the greatest gathering of crowned heads to date—a spectacle so magnificent as to beggar description. The astonishing spectacle and sense of cordial solidarity and togetherness suggested most emphatically that the great superpowers were entering a period of extended peace and cooperation, such as the world had never before seen. Barbara Tuchman immortalized the occasion in a famous passage of her book, The Guns of August:

"So gorgeous was the spectacle on the May morning of 1910 when nine kings rode in the funeral of Edward VII of England that the crowd, waiting in hushed and black-clad awe, could not keep back gasps of admiration. In scarlet and blue and green and purple, three by three the sovereigns rode through the palace gates, with plumed helmets, gold braid, crimson sashes, and jeweled orders flashing in the sun. After them came five heirs apparent, forty more imperial or royal highnesses, seven queens—four dowager and three regnant—and a scattering of special ambassadors from uncrowned countries. Together they represented seventy nations in the greatest assemblage of royalty and rank ever gathered in one place and, of its kind, the last. The muffled tongue of Big Ben tolled nine by the clock as the cortege left the palace, but on history's clock it was sunset, and the sun of the old world was setting in a dying blaze of splendor never to be seen again."

The new king, George V, ascended to the throne in 1910 with his first cousin ruling Germany, and his first cousins ruling vast Russia as Emperor Nicholas II and Empress Alexandra—a circumstance which, to be sure, augured well for continued peace. In the year 1913, the naval rivalry between Britain and Germany seemed to be over, thank Fortune, as Germany agreed to keep its fleet inferior to Britain's at a ratio of ten to sixteen—a most reasonable arrangement. Tensions over the mysterious East had also been alleviated in June of 1914 when Britain and Germany resolved their differences over the Baghdad Railway.

Tensions were ever-present in the heartland of Europe, where ethnic and religious diversity created many small conflicts that threatened to embroil the larger powers in their petty squabbles. Yet it was not easy to imagine this snowballing into something large enough to draw Britain in; for Britain, after all, had no vital interests in the European mainland, as all its interests lay in its vast overseas empire. "We are fish," Lord Salisbury had famously said to explain his government's indifference to inter-European territorial squabbles and its keen interest in the empire its magnificent navy made possible.

In the year 1913, Kaiser Wilhelm's daughter, the Princess Victoria Louise, was married in a ceremony of great pomp and splendor. Her wedding, like the funeral of King Edward before it, brought together a great gathering of European monarchs, suggesting further dissipation of tensions—as if the dark clouds of war had been banished forever. Any semblance of Anglo-German tension looked to have disappeared entirely in that fateful final week of June, 1914. The German Kaiser had joined the festivities of the annual Kiel Week Regatta, where he inaugurated the new Kiel Canal locks in a ceremony most magnificent. That year's regatta was a historical occasion of no small moment, for it saw the invitation of Britain's Royal Navy's Second Battle Squadron, which comprised the four newest and most powerful dreadnaughts in all the world. As the German Navy had grown to become the second greatest navy in the world, the invitation of the mightiest navy to this glorious occasion signaled that the two navies had found a way to peacefully coexist, and the dreadful rivalry between them was over at last. Kaiser Wilhelm, who had been bestowed the rank of admiral in the British Navy by his grandmother, the great Queen Victoria, wore his British admiralty uniform to inspect the British warships—a sight both curious and touching. The evening of Saturday, the twenty-seventh of June, saw boisterous parties as British and German sailors visited each other's boats, drank together like brothers, engaged in friendly boxing matches, and partied into the morning of that fateful day, the twenty-eighth of June. At six o'clock in the evening on that day, with sailors still nursing their hangovers from the previous night's orgies, news would arrive of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne of the ancient Austro-Hungarian Empire—news which fell like a thunderbolt from a clear sky.

The dreadful news would take all the joy out of the events of that glorious week and cause Kaiser Wilhelm to cut his visit short in a manner most precipitous. He left Kiel the very next day, his face no doubt dark with foreboding. King George then sent a message delivered by the commander of the British squadron leaving Kiel on the thirtieth day of June:

"Friends Today
Friends in Future
Friends Forever"

It was almost completely inconceivable to anyone involved that these two mighty navies would be at war in a mere five weeks; but that, Heaven help us, is exactly what happened—a calamity so vast and horrible as to defy all understanding. It was an astonishing turn of events, a catastrophe of unparalleled magnitude. Within the space of one dreadful week between July and August, Europe went from optimism that Austria and Serbia were going to find a diplomatic solution to their quarrel, to an all-out war with five great powers in conflict: Austria-Hungary, Russia, Germany, France, and Britain; and three more powers to follow over the coming months like vultures to a corpse: Japan, the ancient Ottoman Empire, and Italy. To get a sense of just how unlikely this wild conflagration seemed at the time, note that the Serbian-Austrian crisis had not been mentioned in the British parliament for four long weeks after it happened—as if it were a matter of no consequence whatsoever. Hardly anybody had even thought this affair carried any significance for the British Empire. On the twenty-fourth day of July, British Prime Minister Herbert Asquith wrote to his lover, Venetia, in a tone of remarkable complacency: "We are within measurable, or imaginable, distance of a real Armageddon. Happily there seems to be no reason why we should be anything more than spectators." On the twenty-seventh of July, a single day before Austria-Hungary declared war upon Serbia, Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George said there could be no question of taking part in any war; and he knew of no minister who was in favor of such madness.

On the fourth of August, Germany entered Belgium; and on the fifth of August, the first great battle of The Great War began: The Battle of Liège, which pitted the German army against the Belgian army in a contest most bloody. Liège fell on the sixteenth of August, and the German army continued its terrible march through Belgium on its way to France, where one of the most brutal warfronts in all of history awaited them against the French and British armies—a hell upon earth such as man had never before created.

On the twelfth of August, 1814, the Austro-Hungarian military under the command of General Oskar Potiorek launched its first great offensive into Serbia with banners flying. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers were killed and injured on both sides as Serbia succeeded, against all odds, in fending off the Austro-Hungarian attack—one of the greatest upsets in all of military history. Soon after, on the seventeenth of August, Russia invaded the East Prussian province of Galicia and suffered vast losses in a successful German counter-attack, a defeat most crushing. At the Battle of Tannenberg, which took place the following week, Germany achieved a victory so complete, so overwhelming against Russia, that it set Russia on the wrong foot from the very start of this horrible war. On the twenty-third day of May, 1915, Italy declared war upon Austria-Hungary and opened yet another front in this widening conflagration.

Perhaps no better testament to the senselessness—nay, the absolute madness—of this dreadful war existed than the Christmas truce of 1914, when German and English soldiers on the western front both decided, as if moved by some divine impulse, to stop fighting over the Christmas holidays (without having received orders to do so from their superiors) and crossed enemy lines to socialize and exchange gifts like children at a festival. They even played a game of football together, laughing and jesting, before going back to their dark trenches and resuming the senseless slaughter—a circumstance so curious, so horrible in its implications, as to stagger belief. The absurdity of the war was palpable, glaring, undeniable: German soldiers, many of whom had worked in England and liked the country exceedingly and learned to play football there, were now in France to fight the British army of King George V, Kaiser Wilhelm's own cousin—his flesh and blood! Germany had no plans whatsoever to take over Britain, and Britain had no plans to take over Germany; so neither of these sets of soldiers felt any serious threat from one another, nor harbored any genuine animosity. None of the soldiers could quite understand how things had spiraled so quickly, so wildly into this vast and terrible war; nor could the diplomats and intellectuals in the respective countries quite explain it either, try as they might. The Christmas truce laid bare the dreadful truth that these soldiers had nothing against each other, had nothing to gain from fighting this horrible war, and could see no earthly reason to continue it. Whatever rivalry existed between these great nations could very well have been acted out peacefully on the football pitch at the cost of disciplined training, rather than being paid for in the blood of an entire generation—the flower of European youth cut down like wheat before the scythe.

In the aftermath of the war, virtually nobody could explain how the great powers had gone to war against each other with such alacrity. There was a sense, a profound and unsettling conviction, that this was a disaster into which the major powers had inadvertently sleepwalked, like somnambulists heading toward a precipice. After the assassination of the Austrian crown prince in Sarajevo by Serbian nationalists—young men consumed with wild passion—Austria seemed overconfident, absurdly so, in its ability to bring Serbia to heel. The Russians seemed extremely cavalier, almost reckless, about smashing the Austrians in defense of their Serbian brothers. The Germans, in turn, seemed gripped by a dark paranoia, with Kaiser Wilhelm's demons awakened to the terrible conviction that the British, French, and Russians were aiming to destroy Germany utterly. Rather than work to avoid a confrontation with the three powers, the Germans seemed to think, in their wild delusion, that they could take on France, then Russia, all while Britain kept to itself like some peaceful spectator at a gladiatorial contest. The French seemed to have vastly overestimated their ability to fight the Germans and regain Alsace-Lorraine—territories lost in that earlier, bitter conflict. And the British imagined, in their characteristic confidence, that their entry into the fray would decisively and quickly settle the war, bringing the combatants to their senses.

They were all unfathomably, catastrophically wrong.

There is a compelling case to be made that all of the parties deserve their share of the blame for their overreaction and instigation—that each contributed to this vast calamity. It is easy, to be sure, for the historian to simply cast blame everywhere and virtue signal about peace being good and war being the horrible monster that it is. Yet there was also a very real historical context in which this great tragedy was born, one that has its roots in the nineteenth century military conflicts and alliances, and in the imperial ambitions of monarchs who had grown callous—nay, dead—to the true cost of their ambitions in men and treasure, in blood and tears.

As the war headed toward a brutal stalemate and the belligerents seemed hell-bent, as if possessed by demons, on pursuing war at all costs, financing was to prove the decisive factor in determining the war's ultimate outcome. All the great powers of the day were on a classical gold standard; their central banks held vast amounts of gold reserves and issued paper notes and bank credit to their citizens. As war intensified, like some terrible storm gathering strength, pressure upon these reserves increased across the world; for citizens preferred to trust in the immutable laws of chemistry represented in glorious gold over the promises of governments that would do whatever it took to secure what looked like inconsequential victories—victories purchased at a price too dreadful to contemplate.