PART THE FIRST

The Great War

THE relative stability of the monetary order from the year 1873 coincided, it would seem, with the stability of the political order. As the world traded in one money, so it approached also an ideal of one economic unit, with declining restrictions placed upon trade and a marked reduction in those military conflicts which had for so long troubled the affairs of men. Relations between the major powers continued, one observed, to improve over time, and the prospect of war seemed less and less likely with each passing year. Britain and France, bitter rivals these many centuries past, signed the Entente Cordiale in 1904—an agreement which delineated, with considerable precision, British and French colonial possessions in North Africa, prevented conflict between the two countries, and led, in consequence, to a growing cooperation between the two empires. Anglo-Russian relationships had also improved, and with emphasis, through the signing of the Anglo-Russian Convention in 1907, whereby Britain and Russia delineated their several Asian colonies so as to avoid future conflict.

Britain's relationship with Germany was improving also. Through the royal marriages of her children to European monarchs across the continent, Britain's Queen Victoria stood as grandmother to many royals, most notably the German Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose coronation in 1888 marked, to be sure, an auspicious moment for British-German relations, he being the eldest of the forty-two grandchildren of Queen Victoria through her eldest daughter, the Princess Victoria. At his birth, Wilhelm II stood third in line for succession to the Prussian throne and sixth in line for succession to the British throne. When Queen Victoria lay upon her death bed in 1901, Wilhelm II, who loved her dearly and with considerable devotion, traveled to be by her side. It is said that she passed away in his very arms, and that he carried her coffin at her funeral.

After its victory in the Franco-Prussian war, Germany turned its attention to consolidating its empire upon the European mainland, and Britain and Germany approached the twentieth century with their interests harmonized and the threat of war steadily subsiding. Germany could dominate the European mainland whilst Britain expanded its empire in all other quarters of the globe. An alliance between the two great powers was even seriously considered, Germany eventually rejecting it for fear that Britain's imperial entanglements might drag them into an unwanted war with Britain's historic rivals, Russia and France—or, and here was the unthinkable horror, both at once.

From 1890 to 1902, three potential problems emerged, as one now saw, in British-German relations. Kaiser Wilhelm II removed Bismarck from his position as chancellor and ignored his advice to avoid pursuing a foreign empire—a course which inevitably aroused the distrust and discontent of the British, who possessed the world's greatest empire and were loath to see Germany competing with them for territories across the globe. Wilhelm II became obsessed, moreover, with building a navy to support his imperial ambitions, and this provoked considerable animosity from Britain, whose navy was the largest and most powerful in the world and which controlled the entrance to the North Sea, Germany's naval gateway to the wider world.

The death of Queen Victoria in 1901 and the ascension of her son Edward VII to the throne added further friction to British-German relations. Kaiser Wilhelm maintained a jealous rivalry with his uncle Edward, who had always looked down upon him as a young man and his nephew rather than treating him as an equal, a ruling monarch of a superpower in his own right. Known as "the possessor of the least inhibited tongue in Europe," Wilhelm had suffered brain damage during birth which caused him to be erratic, impulsive, and emotional in his manner, and his behavior created needless tension between Germany and Britain that threatened to sour the increasingly cordial and cooperative international order which had been so laboriously constructed. In an infamous interview with The Daily Telegraph in October of 1908, Kaiser Wilhelm's attempts at winning over British public opinion backfired most spectacularly, his outbursts causing increased tension not merely with Britain, but also with France, Russia, and Japan. Wilhelm's naval and imperial ambitions alarmed the British considerably, and he grew increasingly concerned that Britain's rapprochement with France and Russia was designed, with deliberate malice, to encircle and suffocate Germany.

But these fears were alleviated, so it seemed, in the second decade of the twentieth century. After King Edward VII died, Kaiser Wilhelm II attended his funeral upon the twentieth day of May, 1910, and this helped to mend relations with the British people and royalty alike. A popular king at the very zenith of his empire, Edward's funeral procession drew an estimated three to five million persons, with some thirty-five thousand soldiers lining the funeral route. From across Europe and indeed the world, monarchs came and packed the palace in what was the largest gathering of monarchs to that date. The astonishing spectacle, the curious sense of cordial solidarity and togetherness, suggested most emphatically that the superpowers were entering upon a period of extended peace and cooperation. Barbara Tuchman immortalized the occasion in a famous passage of her book, *The Guns of August*, which I may perhaps be permitted to quote:

*So gorgeous was the spectacle on the May morning of 1910 when nine kings rode in the funeral of Edward VII of England that the crowd, waiting in hushed and black-clad awe, could not keep back gasps of admiration. In scarlet and blue and green and purple, three by three the sovereigns rode through the palace gates, with plumed helmets, gold braid, crimson sashes, and jeweled orders flashing in the sun. After them came five heirs apparent, forty more imperial or royal highnesses, seven queens—four dowager and three regnant—and a scattering of special ambassadors from uncrowned countries. Together they represented seventy nations in the greatest assemblage of royalty and rank ever gathered in one place and, of its kind, the last. The muffled tongue of Big Ben tolled nine by the clock as the cortege left the palace, but on history's clock it was sunset, and the sun of the old world was setting in a dying blaze of splendor never to be seen again.*

The new king, George V, ascended to the throne in 1910 with his first cousin ruling Germany, and his first cousins ruling Russia as Emperor Nicholas II and Empress Alexandra. In 1913, the naval rivalry between Britain and Germany seemed, for a moment, to be quite over, as Germany agreed to maintain its fleet inferior to Britain's at a ratio of ten to sixteen. Tensions over the Middle East had also been alleviated in June of 1914 when Britain and Germany resolved their differences concerning the Baghdad Railway.

Tensions were, to be sure, ever-present in the heartland of Europe, where ethnic and religious diversity created many small conflicts that threatened to embroil the larger powers. Yet it was not easy to imagine this snowballing into something large enough to draw Britain into the fray. Britain, after all, had no vital interests upon the European mainland, as all its interests lay in its vast overseas empire. "We are fish," Lord Salisbury had famously said, by way of explaining his government's indifference to inter-European territorial squabbles and its keen interest in that empire which its magnificent navy made possible.

In 1913, Kaiser Wilhelm's daughter, the Princess Victoria Louise, married, and her wedding became yet another great gathering of European monarchs, suggesting a further dissipation of tensions across the continent. Any semblance of Anglo-German tension looked to have disappeared entirely in the fateful final week of June, 1914. The German Kaiser had joined the festivities of the annual Kiel Week Regatta, where he inaugurated the new locks of the Kiel Canal. That year's regatta proved a historical occasion, for it saw the invitation of Britain's Royal Navy's Second Battle Squadron, which comprised the four newest and most powerful dreadnoughts in all the world. As the German Navy had grown to become the second greatest navy in the world, the invitation of the greatest navy to this occasion signaled, with no little emphasis, that the two navies had found a way to peacefully coexist, and that their rivalry was quite over. Kaiser Wilhelm, who had been bestowed the rank of admiral in the British Navy by his grandmother, wore his British admiralty uniform when he went to inspect the British warships. The evening of Saturday, the twenty-seventh of June, saw boisterous parties as British and German sailors visited one another's vessels, drank together with considerable gusto, engaged in friendly boxing matches, and partied well into the morning of the fateful day of June the twenty-eighth. At six o'clock in the evening of that day, with sailors still nursing their hangovers, news arrived of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.

The news took the joy quite out of the events of the week and caused Kaiser Wilhelm to cut his visit short. He left Kiel the following day. King George then sent a message, delivered by the commander of the British squadron as it departed Kiel upon the thirtieth of June:

*Friends Today*  
*Friends in Future*  
*Friends Forever*

It was almost completely inconceivable to anyone involved that these two navies would find themselves at war in a mere five weeks' time, but that, bless me, is precisely what transpired.

It was an astonishing turn of events, strange and terrible in equal measure. Within the space of one week between July and August, Europe went from a state of optimism—that Austria and Serbia were going to find a diplomatic solution to their quarrel—to an all-out war involving five major powers in open conflict: Austria-Hungary, Russia, Germany, France, and Britain, with three more powers following over the coming months—Japan, the Ottoman Empire, and Italy. To obtain a sense of just how unlikely this seemed at the time, one need only observe that the Serbian-Austrian crisis had not been mentioned in the British parliament for four weeks after the assassination occurred. Hardly anybody had thought this affair carried any significance whatsoever for Britain. On July the twenty-fourth, British Prime Minister Herbert Asquith wrote to his lover, Venetia, "We are within measurable, or imaginable, distance of a real Armageddon. Happily there seems to be no reason why we should be anything more than spectators." Upon the twenty-seventh of July, a single day before Austria-Hungary declared war upon Serbia, Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George stated there could be no question of taking part in any war, and he knew of no minister who stood in favor of such a course.

On August the fourth, Germany entered Belgium, and on August the fifth, the first battle of The Great War commenced—the Battle of Liège, which placed the German army against the Belgian forces. Liège fell on August the sixteenth, and the German army continued its inexorable march through Belgium upon its way to France, where one of the most brutal war fronts in the history of mankind awaited them, pitting them against the combined French and British armies.

On August the twelfth, 1914, the Austro-Hungarian military, under the command of General Oskar Potiorek, launched its first offensive into Serbian territory. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers were killed and injured upon both sides as Serbia succeeded, against all expectations, in fending off the Austro-Hungarian attack—one of the greatest upsets in all military history. Soon after, upon the seventeenth of August, Russia invaded the East Prussian province of Galicia and suffered large losses in what proved a successful German counter-attack. At the Battle of Tannenberg, which took place the following week, Germany achieved a crushing defeat of the Russian forces, setting Russia upon the wrong foot from the very start of the war. On May the twenty-third, 1915, Italy declared war upon Austria-Hungary and opened yet another front in this widening conflict.

Perhaps no better testament to the utter senselessness of this war existed than the Christmas truce of 1914, when German and English soldiers upon the western front both decided, quite of their own accord and without having received any orders to do so, to cease fighting over the Christmas holidays. They crossed enemy lines to socialize and exchange small gifts, and they even played a game of football together before returning to their respective trenches and resuming the senseless slaughter. The absurdity of the war was palpable, one observed: German soldiers, many of whom had worked in England and grown fond of that country and learned to play football there, now found themselves in France engaged in mortal combat with the British army of King George V, who was Kaiser Wilhelm's own cousin. Germany harbored no plans whatsoever to conquer Britain, and Britain maintained no designs to seize Germany, so neither set of soldiers felt any serious threat from one another. None of these soldiers could quite understand how matters had spiraled so rapidly into large-scale war, nor could the diplomats and intellectuals in their respective countries explain it with any satisfaction. The Christmas truce laid bare the truth that these soldiers bore no animosity toward each other, had nothing whatsoever to gain from prosecuting this war, and could perceive no reason to continue it. Whatever rivalry might exist between these nations could very well be enacted peacefully upon the football pitch, at the cost of disciplined training rather than the precious blood of an entire generation.

In the aftermath of the war, virtually nobody could explain, with any coherence, how the major powers had stumbled into war with one another. There existed a widespread sense that this was a disaster into which the major powers had inadvertently sleepwalked, so to speak. After the assassination of the Austrian crown prince in Sarajevo by Serbian nationalists, Austria appeared overconfident in its capacity to bring Serbia to heel. The Russians seemed extremely cavalier, one noticed, about their prospects of smashing the Austrians in defense of Serbia. The Germans, in their turn, seemed gripped by a peculiar paranoia, with Kaiser Wilhelm's personal demons awakened to the notion that the British, French, and Russians were conspiring together to destroy Germany utterly. Rather than work with deliberate care to avoid a confrontation with these three powers, the Germans appeared to think they could take on France, then Russia in sequence, all whilst Britain kept to itself and remained neutral. The French seemed to have vastly overestimated their military capacity to fight the Germans and regain the territories of Alsace-Lorraine, and the British imagined, with curious naïveté, that their entry into the conflict would decisively and quickly settle the matter.

They were all unfathomably, tragically wrong.

There exists, to be sure, a compelling case to be made that all of the parties deserve some portion of the blame for their overreaction and instigation. It is easy enough for the historian to cast blame in all directions and to declare, with considerable virtue, that peace is good and war is bad. Yet there existed also a very real historical context in which this tragedy was born—one that had its roots deep in nineteenth-century military conflicts and alliances, and in the imperial ambitions of monarchs who had grown callous, over time, to the true cost of their ambitions measured in the lives of men and the treasure of nations.

As the war proceeded toward a brutal stalemate and the belligerents seemed hell-bent upon pursuing the conflict at any cost, financing proved the decisive factor in determining the war's ultimate outcome. All the major powers of that day stood upon a classical gold standard. Their central banks held large quantities of gold reserves and issued paper notes and bank credit to their citizens. As the war intensified, pressure upon these reserves increased markedly across the world, for citizens preferred to place their trust in the immutable laws of chemistry represented in gold rather than in the promises of governments that would do whatever proved necessary to secure what appeared, to the discerning eye, to be quite inconsequential victories.